The elongated broad-fronted Building Two is directly connected to Building One due to the proximity of the two, and is likely to be an ancillary building associated with the cult Building One. 
It is possible that it had a religious function.
Its construction dates back to the Hellenistic period. 
It has dimensions of twenty by three by eight meters and has four rectangular rooms of about four meters, which communicate with a corridor to the east, two meters wide.
Access to the building was via steps in the long narrow corridor, from the south and north sides.
The interior spaces are preserved at the level of the sub-foundation, from the excavation of which findings from the Geometric to Hellenistic times came to light like Relief pithos, Attic ink vessels, relief skyphos, textile weights, commercial amphorae, figurines and bronze articles of clothing are mentioned as examples.
Based on their masonry and the study of their finds. Buildings one and two seem to be dated to the late Classical to early Hellenistic times, a period where there seems to be a plan to commemorate the Upper City, with the construction of monumental buildings.
Between the buildings, a four-meter-wide scale is inserted that ended in a simple propyla.
It probably forms the upper part of the central staircase that started from the port, passed through the central fountain and ended in the sanctuaries of the Upper City.
During its excavation, a lot of pottery, figurines, lighting vessels and several animal bones were found, some of which probably come from Building One.
This area received some significant intervention in the Roman period, when reddened earth, with many animal bones and pottery (mainly Hellenistic-Roman lamps), probably from the altar area, were piled up there and the stepped access in the SE corner was formed of Building two.
Corresponding stepped accesses to the plateau came to light both parallel to the south side of Building One and to the north of Building Two.
This area with Buildings one and two is important among other things because of the presence of many marble sculptures and also inscriptions, which are rare from Kythnos, which lead to the identification of the deities worshiped here.
The cult of Asclepius can be connected with the hot springs of Kolona and Loutra.
It was made from slate, limestone and shell stone.