At the top of the Acropolis, an important sanctuary occupies a dominant position, which, as surface finds show, was in use from the end of the 8th BC up to the 1st AD.
After excavation in the summer of 2021, the remains of at least 4 buildings came to light (buildings three to six).
The type of finds led to the safe conclusion that the sanctuary was dedicated to the worship of both Demeter and Kore.
During the excavation, hundreds of clay Archaic-Hellenistic figurines were found many of them intact, just as many Archaic-Roman lamps and mixed ritual vessels.
The offerings also include some bronze, silver, bone and glass jewelry, marble vessels, and a marble hand that probably holds a torch.
Several vessels of probably Roman age from the interior of the temple (building Four) are identified as ritual as they have inscriptions carved before firing and are dedications by women to Demeter and Kori.
In the sanctuary, in 2021, four buildings and a retaining wall in the East connecting Buildings three and four were revealed.
Building three, twenty one meters long and eight point five meters wide, with trapezoidal masonry and a monumental entrance in the middle of the elongated North wall, dates to the classical period.
The bilateral Building four, measuring seven point five by seven point five meters, is matched with the temple of the classical times.
Three ritual cases of upright stone slabs were found, partially embedded in a layer of ash containing many burnt animal bones.
Western Building six is configured internally on at least three stepped levels, probably to serve cult purposes.
East Building five, measuring three point eight by three point eight meters, contained as a filling under its floor many intact lamps from the Archaic, Classical and Hellenistic periods, as well as various votive offerings.
Finally, between the main temple and Buildings five and three, a rampart is formed with an entrance from the east, which defined at some point, during the long course of use of the sanctuary (7th century BC to 3rd 4th century AD) a extensive depository containing innumerable votives.
The importance of the sanctuary lies in the close relationship witnessed with the famous sanctuary of Demeter in Eleusis.
Many piglets were in the presence in their place and in the abundance of votive offerings that seem to be related to nightly ceremonies during the Thesmophoria, in which women who resided within the sanctuary took part.
Two inscriptions from the linked sanctuary of Demeter in Eleusis dating to 421 BC and 408 BC indicate that the Kythnians retained their close links to Athens during the last quarter of the 5th century BC.