It is considered as the ancient capital of the island.
Kythnos belongs to the NW Cyclades complex and is located between Kea and Serifos.
The most fully researched and excavated site of the island is the Vryokastro site, as the ancient capital on the NE coast of the island is called today and was the most important site in historical times.
It is an island with a long history and special archaeological interest, with the earliest evidence of presence and habitation dating back to the Mesolithic era at the site of Maroulas. 
It was inhabited from the 12th century BC until the Early Middle Ages.
It was called Kythnos in the ancient times and the island was named after it.
It is also referred to as Ovriokastro and Rigokastro.
Vryokastro is on the northwestern side of the island, between the bays of Merichas and Apokrisi.
The town had an area of 300 acres and was surrounded by city walls ncluding the islet Vryokastraki, which was formerly connected to the coast by a narrow isthmus.
Underwater surveys and excavations show that before the sea level rise, which resulted in the separation of the rocky islet from the coast, there were buildings which are now in the water along with the now underwater walls.
It is the most fully researched and excavated site of the island.
The excavation of the area is ongoing.
To date, public buildings, an aqueduct, an acropolis, two necropolises, a harbor, a sanctuary, a temple, a monumental mound and a large building of the Classical and Hellenistic period have been found in the settlement's area.
Vryokastraki was excavated from 2018 to 2020 and its findings document the human presence in the 12th century BC on the island.
In the upper city a sanctuary complex was found that probably were temples for Asclepius, Cabeiri, Aphrodite, Apollo, and Artemis.
West of the sanctuary the city's Agora during the Hellenistic period was found.
The prosperity of Kythnos was partly due to its copper and iron mines6 and its products especially the goat cheese, perhaps also wine and honey.
After the end of the Persian Wars, Kythnos became a member of the First Athenian League. 
According to research, Dryopians were the first settlers of Kythnos.
Dryopians leader Kythnos, led them to move from Euboea to Kythnos at the end of the Late Bronze Age, giving his name to the island and the ancient polis too.
In fourty eight hundrend BC the Kythnians participated in the naval battle of Salamis with two ships, a trirem and a penteconter.
The Roman period saw the decline of Kythnos, which like other Cycladic islands, served as a site for exile or as a pirate base.
Kythnos played a crucial role in the development of the early metallurgy.