The most important excavated complex in the area of the ancient city to date is the Sanctuary of the Middle Plateau			. 
It is a sanctuary of the Archaic, Classical and Hellenistic times.
The sanctuary (with the temple, Building three) systematically excavated until two thousand and six was probably dedicated to the sister deities Apollo and Artemis, and its excavation yielded hundreds of valuable dedications (about one thousand and five hundred) from a wide range of materials, as the " shelter" of the temple in which they were placed was untouched and all the artefacts were found in their place (in situ). 
These are mostly valuable tributes mostly dated in archaic times. 
These findings seem to come from many areas not only of the Aegean but also of the Mediterranean in general, underlining the importance and radiance of the sanctuary in question. 
Both the wealth and the varied and exotic origins of the finds lead to the revision of the image of relative poverty we had formed for ancient Kythnos, which, until now, arose from the scant philological and epigraphic evidence available. The special significance of the sanctuary lies in the fact that the "shelter" of the temple was found undisturbed, something extremely rare for an ancient temple. 
Regarding the form of the temple, it is a rectangular Doric building in the Doric style made of slate with the addition of conch shells to the upper structure.
It had dimensions of eight point five x two point nine m and a western orientation. The temple had a twin house with a common partition and facade. The temple surrounds a foundation outside with diameter about fourteen × eight pont sixty five meters. 
Some transverse struts connecting the main temple to this foundation, creating the image of a rectangular grid, were added during Hellenistic times in order to strengthen the building, which was apparently in danger of collapsing. 
The temple stood on a mound supported by strong retaining walls. Probably built in the early Archaic years (seventh century BC), it was destroyed at the end of the 3rd century BC. from an earthquake. 
Then only the N house is repaired and the earlier tributes were placed in a specially designed "shelter", measuring three × two meter, with the tributes placed in relative order on shelves or boxes, or hung on the walls. 
Based on the available data, an attempt has been made to restore both the first and second phases of use of the sanctuary with plans drawn up by the archaeologist-designer Yiannis Nakas, under the guidance of Alexandros Mazarakis Ainiana.
Gold, silver, copper, bone jewelry such as earrings, rings, bracelets, buckles, forks, plates, necklace beads and various types of periaptas were found inside the shelter of the temple of Kythnos. 
Many of these are of crystal, vitreous, faience, semi-precious stones, electrum (amber) and coral. 
Among the finds are carved ivory discs and incised tiles, Egyptian scarabs, Phoenician bearded heads, throne-type female clay figurines seated figure and numerous intact decorated vases (most of them ornamental) imported from various regions of the Aegean area. Hundreds of shells were also found, as well as a few bones of small animals (among them several ankles - guts) and a few of birds.
South-east of the temple were discovered two altars, in the area of which traces of burning and burnt animal bones were found, and an extensive "repository" along the fortified wall of the city, which also contained hundreds of valuable offerings of various kinds, similar to those found inside temple.