From 2018 to 2020, excavation work continued on the islet of Vryokastraki, a site with continuous habitation from the 10th century BC to the 7th century AD and sporadic indications of human presence during the 12th century BC.
Clear indications of a Cycladic settlement come from places carved into the natural rock, in which pottery from the third millennium was found.
The initial findings indicate based on the surface research, that the core of the original habitation of the ancient city was the rock island and that the population of the city shrank here in the Paleo-Christian years, shortly before the site was finally abandoned and its remaining inhabitants moved to upper citadel known today as the Castle of Oria or Katakefalo.
The rocky islet, until at least late antiquity, must have been connected to the coast by a narrow isthmus.
The building remains and the finds that came to light attest to the centuries-old use of the island.
A three-aisled early Christian basilica was excavated, an oblong building of late antiquity, consisting of 15 rooms in a row, part of the coastal wall and a monumental monument of Classical times belonging to a sanctuary of the Geometric to Classical period.
A proto-Byzantine three-aisled church was found which is the evolution of "secular" worship into a Christian three-aisled one and the sanctuary with its analimma and the monumental altar, whose worship is the oldest in Vryokastro 10th century BC.
On the islet we have the earliest and later structures that have been dated.
Based on the collected pottery, the city must have been abandoned in the sixth or seventh century AD, when the inhabitants moved to the fortified settlement of Kastro.
Funerary reliefs, sculptures, architectural members, inscriptions, fragments of Archaic relief pithoi, Attic Archaic and Classical fine-decorated pottery, amphora stamps are some of the finds recovered during the survey of the ancient city.
Remains of the foundation of the coastal fortification wall and a breakwater over one hundrend meter long and thirty meter wide, which closed the South entrance to the harbour, were detected in the bottom of the sea.
Some important Roman statues, which had been reused in the foundations of the citys wall, were found thus supporting the fact that in the Roman Imperial period Kythnos was declining and the city shrank around the harbour, while the sanctuaries of the Upper Town were apparently being deserted.
The found wall can be dated to the Classical or the Hellenistic era, even though some parts, especially in the Upper Town, due to their masonry style, might be Archaic.
